

www.caymanchem.com
## Customer Service 800.364.9897
## Technical Support 888.526.5351
1180 E. Ellsworth Rd · Ann Arbor, MI · USA
## Catalase Assay Kit
## Item No. 707002

## 3
## GENERAL INFORMATION
## TABLE OF CONTENTS
GENERAL INFORMATION 3 Materials Supplied
## 4 Safety Data
## 4    Precautions
## 5 If You Have Problems
5 Storage and Stability
5 Materials Needed but Not Supplied
INTRODUCTION 6    Background
## 7 About This Assay
PRE-ASSAY PREPARATION 8 Reagent Preparation
## 10 Sample Preparation
ASSAY PROTOCOL 13 Plate Set Up
## 15 Standard Preparation
16 Performing the Assay
ANALYSIS                                          17  Calculations
## 18 Performance Characteristics
19 Linearity of the Assay
RESOURCES 20  Interferences
## 21  Troubleshooting
## 21  References
## 22 Plate Template
## 23  Notes
23 Warranty and Limitation of Remedy
## GENERAL INFORMATION
## Materials Supplied
## Item
## Number
Item96 wells
Quantity/Size
480 wells
Quantity/Size
707010Catalase Assay Buffer (10X)1 vial/5 ml2 vials/5 ml
707012Catalase Sample Buffer (10X)1 vial/10 ml2 vials/10 ml
707014Catalase Formaldehyde Standard1 vial/100 μl1 vial/100 μl
707013Catalase (Control)1 vial/lyophilized2 vials/lyophilized
707015Catalase Potassium Hydroxide1 vial/4 ml5 vials/4 ml
707011Catalase Hydrogen Peroxide1 vial/1 ml1 vial/1 ml
707017Catalase Purpald (Chromogen)1 vial/4 ml5 vials/4 ml
707018Catalase Potassium Periodate1 vial/1.5 ml5 vials/1.5 ml
40001096-Well Clear Plate1 plate5 plates
40001296-Well Cover Sheet1 cover5 covers
If  any  of  the  items  listed  above  are  damaged  or  missing,  please  contact  our
Customer Service department at (800) 364-9897 or (734) 971-3335. We cannot
accept any returns without prior authorization.
## !
## WARNING: THIS PRODUCT IS FOR RESEARCH ONLY - NOT FOR
## HUMAN OR VETERINARY DIAGNOSTIC OR THERAPEUTIC USE.

## 4
## GENERAL INFORMATION
## 5
## GENERAL INFORMATION
## Safety Data
This material should be considered hazardous until further information becomes
available.  Do  not  ingest,  inhale,  get  in  eyes,  on  skin,  or  on  clothing.  Wash
thoroughly after handling. Before use, the user must review the complete Safety
Data Sheet, which has been sent via email to your institution.
## Precautions
Please read these instructions carefully before beginning this assay.
It is recommended to take appropriate precautions when using the kit reagents
(i.e., lab coat, gloves, eye goggles, etc.) as some of them can be harmful.
Catalase  Hydrogen  Peroxide  is  corrosive  and  is  harmful  if  swallowed.  Contact
with skin may cause burns. In case of contact with skin or eyes, rinse immediately
with plenty of water for 15 minutes. Keep away from combustible materials.*
Catalase Formaldehyde Standard is carcinogenic. It is toxic if inhaled, ingested, or
if in contact with skin. In case of contact with skin or eyes, rinse immediately with
plenty of water for 15 minutes. Keep away from combustible materials.*
Catalase Potassium Hydroxide is corrosive and is harmful if swallowed. Contact
with skin may cause burns. In case of contact with skin or eyes, rinse immediately
with plenty of water for 15 minutes. Keep away from combustible materials.*
Catalase Purpald (Chromogen) is an irritant. In case of contact with skin or eyes,
rinse immediately with plenty of water for 15 minutes.*
Catalase  Potassium  Periodate  is  an  oxidizer  and  an  irritant.  In  case  of  contact
with skin or eyes, rinse immediately with plenty of water for 15 minutes.*
Hydrochloric acid is corrosive and is harmful if swallowed. Contact with skin may
cause burns. In case of contact with skin or eyes, rinse immediately with plenty
of water for 15 minutes.*
*Before use the user must review the complete Material Safety Data Sheet.
## If You Have Problems
## Technical Service Contact Information
Phone: 888-526-5351 (USA and Canada only) or 734-975-3888
Email:             techserv@caymanchem.com
In order for our staff to assist you quickly and efficiently, please be ready to supply
the lot number of the kit (found on the outside of the box).
Storage and Stability
This kit will perform as specified if stored at 4°C and used before the expiration
date indicated on the outside of the box.
## Materials Needed But Not Supplied
- A plate reader with a 540 nm filter.
- An adjustable pipettor and a repeating pipettor.
-  A  source  of  pure  water.  Glass  distilled  water  or  HPLC-grade  water  is
acceptable.
- A 5 ml vial of methanol can be purchased from Cayman (Item No. 707016).

## 6
## INTRODUCTION
## 7
## INTRODUCTION
## INTRODUCTION
## Background
Catalase  (EC  1.11.1.6;  2H
## 2
## O
## 2
oxidoreductase)  is  an  ubiquitous  antioxidant
enzyme  that  is  present  in  most  aerobic  cells.  Catalase  (CAT)  is  involved  in  the
detoxification  of  hydrogen  peroxide  (H
## 2
## O
## 2
),  a  reactive  oxygen  species  (ROS),
which is a toxic product of both normal aerobic metabolism and pathogenic ROS
production.  This  enzyme  catalyzes  the  conversion  of  two  molecules  of  H
## 2
## O
## 2

to  molecular  oxygen  and  two  molecules  of  water  (catalytic  activity).  CAT  also
demonstrates  peroxidatic  activity,  in  which  low  molecular  weight  alcohols  can
serve  as  electron  donors.  While  aliphatic  alcohols  serve  as  specific  substrates
for CAT, other enzymes with peroxidatic activity do not utilize these substrates.
(Peroxida⑱c Ac⑱vity)
(Cataly⑱c Ac⑱vity)
## 2H
## 2
## O
## 2
## H
## 2
## O
## 2

## +
## AH
## 2
## O
## 2

## +
## 2H
## 2
## O
## A
## +
## 2H
## 2
## O
## Catalase
## Catalase
In humans, the highest levels of CAT are found in liver, kidney, and erythrocytes,
where it is believed to account for the majority of H
## 2
## O
## 2
decomposition.
## About This Assay
Cayman’s   Catalase   Assay   Kit   utilizes   the   peroxidatic   function   of   CAT   for
determination  of  enzyme  activity.  The  method  is  based  on  the  reaction  of  the
enzyme with methanol in the presence of an optimal concentration of H
## 2
## O
## 2
## . The
formaldehyde produced is measured colorimetrically with 4-amino-3-hydrazino-
5-mercapto-1,2,4-triazole  (Purpald)  as  the  chromogen.
## 1,2
Purpald  specifically
forms a bicyclic heterocycle with aldehydes, which upon oxidation changes from
colorless to a purple color.
## 1,2
The assay can be used to measure CAT activity in
plasma, serum, erythrocyte lysates, tissue homogenates, and cell lysates.

## 8
## PRE-ASSAY PREPARATION
## 9
## PRE-ASSAY PREPARATION
-   Catalase (Control) – (Item No. 707013)
Each  vial  contains  a  lyophilized  powder  of  bovine  liver  CAT  and  is  used  as
a  positive  control.  Reconstitute  the  Catalase  (Control)  by  adding  2  ml  of
Catalase Sample Buffer (1X) to the vial and vortex well. Take 100 μl of the
reconstituted  enzyme  and  dilute  with  1.9  ml  of  Catalase  Sample  Buffer
(1X). A 20 μl aliquot of this diluted enzyme per well causes an absorbance
between  0.25-0.45  OD  before  subtracting  the  background.  The  diluted
enzyme  is  stable  for  30  minutes.  The  reconstituted  Catalase  (Control)  is
stable for one month at -20°C.
-   Catalase Potassium Hydroxide – (Item No. 707015)
Each vial contains 4 ml of 10 M potassium hydroxide (KOH). The reagent is
ready to use as supplied.
-   Catalase Hydrogen Peroxide – (Item No. 707011)
The  vial  contains  an  8.82  M  solution  of  H
## 2
## O
## 2
.  Dilute  40  μl  of  Catalase
Hydrogen   Peroxide   with   9.96   ml   of   HPLC-grade   water.   The   diluted
Hydrogen Peroxide solution is stable for two hours.
-   Catalase Purpald (Chromogen) – (Item No. 707017)
Each  vial  contains  4  ml  of  4-amino-3-hydrazino-5-mercapto-1,2,4-triazole
(Purpald) in 0.5 M hydrochloric acid. The reagent is ready to use as supplied.
-   Catalase Potassium Periodate – (Item No. 707018)
Each  vial  contains  1.5  ml  of  potassium  periodate  in  0.5  M  potassium
hydroxide. The reagent is ready to use as supplied.
## PRE-ASSAY PREPARATION
## Reagent Preparation
NOTE: Methanol is no longer supplied in this kit. It can be purchased separately under
Item No. 707016 or you can supply your own.
-   Catalase Assay Buffer (10X) – (Item No. 707010)
Each vial contains 5 ml of Assay Buffer. Dilute 2 ml of Catalase Assay Buffer
concentrate  with  18  ml  of  HPLC-grade  water.  This  final  Catalase  Assay
Buffer  (1X)  (100  mM  potassium  phosphate,  pH  7.0)  should  be  used  in  the
assay. When stored at 4°C, it is stable for at least two months. Prepare the
additional vial as needed.
-   Catalase Sample Buffer (10X) – (Item No. 707012)
Each  vial  contains  10  ml  of  Sample  Buffer.  Dilute  5  ml  of  Catalase  Sample
Buffer  concentrate  with  45  ml  of  HPLC-grade  water.  This  final  Catalase
Sample Buffer (1X) (25 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.5, containing 1 mM
EDTA and 0.1% BSA) should be used to dilute the formaldehyde standards,
Catalase (Control), and CAT samples prior to assaying. When stored at 4°C,
the  Catalase  Sample  Buffer  (1X)  is  stable  for  at  least  two  months.  Prepare
the additional vial as needed.
-   Catalase Formaldehyde Standard - (Item No. 707014)
The  vial  contains  4.25  M  formaldehyde.  The  reagent  is  ready  to  use  as
supplied.

## 10
## PRE-ASSAY PREPARATION
## 11
## PRE-ASSAY PREPARATION
## Sample Preparation
Overheating  can  inactivate  catalase.  The  enzyme  should  be  kept  cold  during
sample  preparation  and  assaying.  In  general,  catalase  is  very  unstable  at  high
dilution.  It  is  recommended  to  store  samples  concentrated  and  assay  within
30 minutes after dilution.
## Tissue Homogenate
-  Prior  to  dissection,  either  perfuse  tissue  or  rinse  tissue  with  a  phosphate
buffered  saline  (PBS)  solution,  pH  7.4,  to  remove  any  red  blood  cells  and
clots.
-  Homogenize  the  tissue  on  ice  in  5-10  ml  of  cold  buffer  (i.e.,  50  mM
potassium phosphate, pH 7.0, containing 1 mM EDTA) per gram tissue.
- Centrifuge at 10,000 x g for 15 minutes at 4°C.
-  Remove  the  supernatant  for  assay  and  store  on  ice.  If  not  assaying  on  the
same day, freeze the sample at -80°C. The sample will be stable for at least
one month.
## Cell Lysate
- Collect cells by centrifugation (i.e., 1,000-2,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C).
For  adherent  cells,  do  not  harvest  using  proteolytic  enzymes;  rather  use  a
rubber policeman.
-  Homogenize  or  sonicate  the  cell  pellet  on  ice  in  1-2  ml  of  cold  buffer  (i.e.,
50 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.0, containing 1 mM EDTA).
- Centrifuge at 10,000 x g for 15 minutes at 4°C.
-  Remove  the  supernatant  for  assay  and  store  on  ice.  If  not  assaying  on  the
same day, freeze the sample at -80°C. The sample will be stable for at least
one month.
Plasma and Erythrocyte Lysate
- Collect blood using an anticoagulant such as heparin, citrate, or EDTA.
-  Centrifuge  the  blood  at  700-1,000  x  g  for  10  minutes  at  4°C.  Pipette  off
the top yellow plasma layer without disturbing the white buffy layer. Store
plasma on ice until assaying or freeze at -80°C. The plasma sample will be
stable for at least one month.
- Remove the white buffy layer (leukocytes) and discard.
-  Lyse  the  erythrocytes  (red  blood  cells)  in  four  times  its  volume  of  ice-cold
HPLC-grade water.
- Centrifuge at 10,000 x g for 15 minutes at 4°C.
- Collect the supernatant (erythrocyte lysate) for assaying and store on ice. If
not assaying the same day, freeze at -80°C. The sample will be stable for at
least one month.
## Serum
-  Collect  blood  without  using  an  anticoagulant.  Allow  blood  to  clot  for
30 minutes at 25°C.
- Centrifuge the blood at 2,000 x g for 15 minutes at 4°C. Pipette off the top
yellow serum layer without disturbing the white buffy layer. Store serum on
ice. If not assaying the same day, freeze at -80°C. The sample will be stable
for at least one month.

## 13
## ASSAY PROTOCOL
## 12
## PRE-ASSAY PREPARATION
Tissue Homogenization using the Precellys 24 Homogenizer
-  Prior  to  dissection,  either  perfuse  or  rinse  tissue  with  phosphate  buffered
saline (PBS), pH 7.4, to remove any red blood cells and clots.
-   Freeze   organs   immediately   upon   collection   and   then   store   at   -80°C.
Snap-freezing of tissues in liquid nitrogen is preferred.
- Add cold 50 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.0, containing 1 mM EDTA.
-   Homogenize   the   tissue   sample   using   the   Precellys   24   according   to
appropriate settings.
- Spin the tissue homogenates at 10,000 x g for 15 minutes at 4°C.
- Collect supernatant and assay samples according to the kit booklet protocol.
Samples  may  need  to  be  diluted  appropriately  for  assay  and  should  be
normalized using a protein assay.
## ASSAY PROTOCOL
## Plate Set Up
There  is  no  specific  pattern  for  using  the  wells  on  the  plate.  We  suggest  that
there  be  at  least  two  wells  designated  as  positive  controls.  A  typical  layout  of
formaldehyde  standards  and  samples  to  be  measured  in  duplicate  is  shown  in
Figure 1. We suggest you record the contents of each well on the template sheet
provided on page 22.
## A
## B
## C
## D
## E
## F
## G
## H
## 123456789101112
## A
## B
## C
## D
## E
## F
## G
## +
## S8
## S7
## S6
## S5
## S4
## S3
## S2
## S1
## S8
## S7
## S6
## S5
## S4
## S3
## S2
## S1
## S16
## S15
## S14
## S13
## S12
## S11
## S10
## S9
## S16
## S15
## S14
## S13
## S12
## S11
## S10
## S9
## S24
## S23
## S22
## S21
## S20
## S19
## S18
## S17
## S24
## S23
## S22
## S21
## S20
## S19
## S18
## S17
## S32
## S31
## S30
## S29
## S28
## S27
## S26
## S25
## S32
## S31
## S30
## S29
## S28
## S27
## S26
## S25
## S40
## S39
## S38
## S37
## S36
## S35
## S34
## S33
## S33
## S40
## S39
## S38
## S37
## S36
## S35
## S34
## A
## B
## C
## D
## E
## F
## G
## +
A-G = Standards
+ = Posi⑱ve controls
S1-S40 = Sample wells
Figure 1.  Sample plate format

## 14
## ASSAY PROTOCOL
## 15
## ASSAY PROTOCOL

## Pipetting Hints
-  It  is  recommended  that  an  adjustable  pipette  be  used  to  deliver
reagents to the wells.
-   Before  pipetting  each  reagent,  equilibrate  the  pipette  tip  in  that
reagent (i.e., slowly fill the tip and gently expel the contents, repeat
several times).
- Do not expose the pipette tip to the reagent(s) already in the well.
## General Information
- The final volume of the assay is 240 μl in all the wells.
- All  reagents  except  samples  must  be  equilibrated  to  room  temperature
before beginning the assay.
- It is not necessary to use all the wells on the plate at one time.
- If the expected CAT activity of the sample is not known or if it is expected to
be beyond the range of the standard curve, it is prudent to assay the sample
at several dilutions.
- It is recommended that the samples and formaldehyde standards be assayed
at least in duplicate.
- Use the Catalase Sample Buffer (1X) in the assay.
- Monitor the absorbance at 540 nm using a plate reader.
## Standard Preparation
Preparation  of  the  Formaldehyde  Standards  -  Dilute  10  μl  of  Catalase
Formaldehyde  Standard  (Item  No.  707014)  with  9.99  ml  of  Catalase  Sample
Buffer (1X) to obtain a 4.25 mM formaldehyde stock solution. Take seven clean
glass test tubes and mark them A-G. Add the amount of formaldehyde stock and
Catalase Sample Buffer (1X) to each tube as described in Table 1 (below).
TubeFormaldehyde
## (μl)
## Catalase Sample
Buffer (1X) (μl)
## Final Concentration
(μM formaldehyde)*
## A01,0000
## B109905
## C3097015
## D6094030
## E9091045
## F12088060
## G15085075
## Table 1
*Final formaldehyde concentration in the 170 μl reaction.

## 17
## ANALYSIS
## 16
## ASSAY PROTOCOL
Performing the Assay
- Formaldehyde Standard Wells - Add 100 μl of Catalase Assay Buffer (1X), 30
μl of methanol, and 20 μl of standard (tubes A-G) per well in the designated
wells on the plate (see Sample plate format, Figure 1, page 13).
- Positive Control Wells (bovine liver CAT) - Add 100 μl of Catalase Assay
Buffer (1X), 30 μl of methanol, and 20 μl of diluted Catalase (Control) to two
wells.
- Sample Wells - Add 100 μl of Catalase Assay Buffer (1X), 30 μl of methanol,
and  20  μl  of  sample  to  two  wells.  When  necessary,  samples  should  be
diluted  with  Catalase  Sample  Buffer  (1X)  or  concentrated  with  an  Amicon
centrifuge concentrator with a molecular weight cut-off of 100,000.
- Initiate the reactions by adding 20 μl of diluted Hydrogen Peroxide to all the
wells being used. Make sure to note the precise time the reaction is initiated
and add the diluted Hydrogen Peroxide as quickly as possible.
- Cover the plate with the plate cover and incubate on a shaker for 20 minutes
at room temperature.
- Add 30 μl of Potassium Hydroxide to each well to terminate the reaction
and then add 30 μl of Catalase Purpald (Chromogen) (Item No. 707017) to
each well.
-  Cover  the  plate  with  the  plate  cover  and  incubate  for  10  minutes  at  room
temperature on the shaker.
- Add 10 μl of Catalase Potassium Periodate (Item No. 707018) to each well.
Cover with plate cover and incubate five minutes at room temperature on a
shaker.
- Read the absorbance at 540 nm using a plate reader.
## ANALYSIS
## Calculations
Determination of the Reaction Rate
- Calculate the average absorbances of each standard and sample.
-  Subtract  the  average  absorbance  of  standard  A  from  itself  and  all  other
standards and samples.
- Plot the corrected absorbance of standards (from step 2 above) as a function
of final formaldehyde concentration (μM) from Table 1. See Figure 2 for a
typical standard curve.
y = 0.01x - 0.0034
r
## 2
## = 0.9987
## 0.4
## 0.6
## 0.7
## 0.8
Absorbance (540 nm)
Formaldehyde (μM)
## 0
## 10
## 30
## 40
## 50
## 60
## 0.0
## 0.1
## 0.2
## 0.3
## 80
## 70
## 0.5
## 20
Figure 2.  Formaldehyde standard curve

## 18
## ANALYSIS
## 19
## ANALYSIS
- Calculate the formaldehyde concentration of the samples using the equation
obtained  from  the  linear  regression  of  the  standard  curve  substituting
corrected absorbance values for each sample.
Formaldehyde (μM) =
Sample absorbance - (y-intercept)
## Slope
## ]
## [
0.17 ml
0.02 ml
x
- Calculate the CAT activity of the sample using the following equation. One
unit  is  defined  as  the  amount  of  enzyme  that  will  cause  the  formation  of
1.0 nmol of formaldehyde per minute at 25°C.
CAT Ac③vity  =
μM of Sample
x  Sample dilu⑱on  =  nmol/min/ml
20 min.
## Performance Characteristics
## Sensitivity:
The Lower Limit of Detection (LLOD) for this assay is 2 nmol/min/ml. The assay
is  linear  up  to  96  nmol/min/ml,  unless  limited  by  the  accuracy  of  absorbance
measurement.
## Precision:
When a series of 45 CAT measurements were performed on the same day, the
intra-assay   coefficient   of   variation   was   3.8%.   When   a   series   of   45   CAT
measurements   were   performed   on   five   different   days   under   the   same
experimental conditions, the inter-assay coefficient of variation was 9.9%.
Linearity of the Assay
The dose-response relationship for purified CAT from bovine liver was linear from
5-80 ng of protein (see Figure 3, below). Tissue homogenates, cell lysates, plasma,
serum, and erythrocyte lysates also exhibited a linear relationship between the
amount of sample and CAT activity over a wide range.
y = 0.0154x - 0.0274
r
## 2
## = 0.9955
## 0.6
## 1. 0
## 1. 2
## 1. 4
Absorbance (540 nm)
Bovine liver catalase (ng)
## 0
## 10
## 40
## 50
## 60
## 80
## 0.0
## 0.2
## 0.4
## 10 0
## 90
## 0.8
## 30
## 70
## 20
Figure 3. Absorbance bsorbance versusversus bovine liver catalase  bovine liver catalase (ng)

## 20
## RESOURCES
## 21
## RESOURCES
## RESOURCES
## Interferences
The following reagents were tested for interference in the assay.
ReagentWill Interfere
(Yes or No)
## Detergents:
SDS (precipitates at pH 7.0)Ye s
Triton X-100 (≤1%)No
Polysorbate 20 (≤1%)No
CHAPS (≤1%)No
## Buffers:
TrisNo
HEPESNo
PhosphateNo
## Protease Inhibitors/
## Chelators:
Antipain (≤0.1 mg/ml)No
PMSF (≤1 mM)No
Leupeptin (≤1 mg/ml)No
Trypsin (≤0.1 mg/ml)No
Chymostatin (≤1 mg/ml)No
EGTA (≤1 mM)No
EDTA (≤1 mM)No
## Others:
NADPH (≤2 μM)No
Glycerol (≤1%)No
BSA (≤1 mg/ml)No
## Troubleshooting
ProblemPossible CausesRecommended Solutions
Erratic values;
dispersion of
duplicates/triplicates
## A.   Poor
pipetting/technique
B.   Bubble in the well(s)
C.   Poor timing between
addition of the reagents
into the well(s)
A.   Be careful not to splash the
contents of the wells
B.   Scan immediately after the
last incubation. Carefully
tap the side of the plate
with your finger to remove
bubbles. If the wells are
covered with bubbles,
re-scan the plate after
centrifuging the plate at
1,000 x g for 1 minute
without the plate cover or
after popping the bubbles
with a syringe needle
C.   Add reagents to the well(s)
within less than one minute
No activity was
detected in the
sample
A.   Catalase activity was
too low
B.   Sample was too dilute
Concentrate the samples using
an Amicon concentrator with a
molecular weight
cut-off of 100,000 and re-assay
Absorbance over 1.2
in the sample wells
Too much enzyme was
added to well(s)
Dilute samples with diluted
Sample Buffer and re-assay
Absorbance of
standard A is >0.2
A.   The methanol is
contaminated
B.   Extended time between
last incubation and the
plate reading
A.   Re-assay using methanol
from a fresh container
B.   Read the plate immediately
after the last incubation
step
## References
- Johansson, L.H. and Borg, L.A.H. Anal. Biochem. 174, 331-336 (1988).
- Wheeler, C.R., Salzman, J.A., Elsayed, N.M., et al. Anal. Biochem. 184, 193-199 (1990).

## 22
## RESOURCES
## 23
## RESOURCES
## ABCD
## E
## F
## G
## H
## 12
## 34
## 5678
## 9101112
## NOTES
Warranty and Limitation of Remedy
Buyer agrees to purchase the material subject to Cayman’s Terms and Conditions.
Complete  Terms  and  Conditions  including  Warranty  and  Limitation  of  Liability
information can be found on our website.
This document is copyrighted. All rights are reserved. This document may not, in
whole or part, be copied, photocopied, reproduced, translated, or reduced to any
electronic  medium  or  machine-readable  form  without  prior  consent,  in  writing,
from Cayman Chemical Company.
©06/03/2025, Cayman Chemical Company, Ann Arbor, MI, All rights reserved.
Printed in U.S.A.

